Acts 3

0
The Lame Beggar Healed

Petrus ban Yohannes basye mbombog a mbè tempel

1
Now Peter and John were going up to the temple at the hour of prayer, the ninth hour.

Petrus ban Yohannes bëngabë bëdë a tempel asu ngogëlan mëwola ebul. 

2
And a man lame from birth was being carried, whom they laid daily at the gate of the temple that is called the Beautiful Gate to ask alms of those entering the temple.

Bod bëngazu bëbëgë mod ya angabyali mbombog; bëkarëga nyè toe amos osë a mbè tempel ya baloe na «Abëṅ mbè», asu yë na adzaè e bod banyian a tempel man mòni.

3
Seeing Peter and John about to go into the temple, he asked to receive alms.

Ayen angayen Petrus ban Yohannes bëyiigi nyian a tempel, ndò angadzaè bò mòni.

4
And Peter directed his gaze at him, as did John, and said, "Look at us."

Ndò Petrus afòmbò nyè, fufulu ai Yohannes, nyè na: «Bëbëgë bia».

5
And he fixed his attention on them, expecting to receive something from them. 

E mod nyò angafòmbò bò, afidigi na ayi bi dzom abë bò. 

6
But Peter said, "I have no silver and gold, but what I do have I give to you. In the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, rise up and walk!"

Petrus nyè na: «Tò mòni, tò mvòt, mabëlë ki, dzam da, e dzi mëbëlë ndzò mavë wa. A dzoe Yesus Kristus man Nazaret, tëbëgë a si, owulu».

7
And he took him by the right hand and raised him up, and immediately his feet and ankles were made strong. 

Ndò abi nyè a wò mbo-nnomo, atele nyè a si. Etye etye te, mëkol ai mvòṅëlò bimana nyè won, 

8
And leaping up, he stood and began to walk, and entered the temple with them, walking and leaping and praising God. 

amëṅë a yob, antëlë, angakë awulu; ndò anyian ai bò a tempel awulugu, ayëlëgë, alugu Zamba. 

9
And all the people saw him walking and praising God, 

Bod bësë bëyënë nyè anë awulu, alugu Zamba. 

10
and recognized him as the one who sat at the Beautiful Gate of the temple, asking for alms. And they were filled with wonder and amazement at what had happened to him.

Bëdugan nyè yëm na ṅnyè akarëga tòbò a mbè ya tempel asu mòni, ndò bëngadzie ai minkamaṅ ai ndzaṅan fëg asu e dzam angabò mod te.

0
Peter Speaks in Solomon's Portico

Petrus anòṅ nkòbò a minkum mi Salomon

11
While he clung to Peter and John, all the people, utterly astounded, ran together to them in the portico called Solomon's. 

Ndò angalad Petrus ai Yohannes a nyòl ha, bod bësë bëngazu mimbil mfag bëngabë a minkum baloe na minkum mi Salomon, bò bësë hë akam.

12
And when Peter saw it he addressed the people: "Men of Israel, why do you wonder at this, or why do you stare at us, as though by our own power or piety we have made him walk? 

Petrus angayi yen nala, nyè ai bod na: «A bod ya Israel, dze miakam e dzam di, ndò ki dze miabëbë bia hë anë bia bibò na e mod nyò awulu a ngul dzaan a yob, ngë ki na mbol biadaṅ kam Zamba? 

13
The God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, the God of our fathers, glorified his servant Jesus, whom you delivered over and denied in the presence of Pilate, when he had decided to release him.

Zamba Abraham ai Zamba Isaak ai Zamba Yakob, Zamba bëtara , avë mòn woe Yesus duma, e nyò ya mina mingakuan ai nyè, misie fë nyè a mis më Pilatus, eyòṅ nyè angatsig na asoe nyè.

14
But you denied the Holy and Righteous One, and asked for a murderer to be granted to you, 

Mina mingasie mfufubu ai sosoo, misili na bësoe mina ṅwoe bod,

15
and you killed the Author of life, whom God raised from the dead. To this we are witnesses. 

mingawoe mbonde enyiṅ; ṅnyè Zamba akuli a bëkon, ndò bia bënë bëbòòlò boe.

16
And his name—by faith in his name—has made this man strong whom you see and know, and the faith that is through Jesus has given the man this perfect health in the presence of you all.

Ndò hm, a ṅyëbë ya dzoe die, e mod mitala nyò, a miayëm fë nyè, dzoe die awono nyè, ndò ṅyëbë ya dzoe die ovë nyè e mvoè mina bësë miayen nyi.

17
"And now, brothers, I know that you acted in ignorance, as did also your rulers. 

Ndò etoa dzi, a babëdzaṅ, mayëm na mingabò nala mbol tègè yëm angabë bëlë mina, akyaè fë bëdzoe ban bëngabò.

18
But what God foretold by the mouth of all the prophets, that his Christ would suffer, he thus fulfilled. 

Ndò hm Zamba, e mam angatari kad a anyu bëprofèt bësë na Kristus woe ayi bëlë mintye, adzala ya dò totoe. 

19
Repent therefore, and turn back, that your sins may be blotted out, 

Vëṅan hm, midugan mfag minsëm miavaaban mina,

20
that times of refreshing may come from the presence of the Lord, and that he may send the Christ appointed for you, Jesus, 

asu yë na abog evovoe azu abë Nti, alom mina e nyò angatele, Kristus Yesus,

21
whom heaven must receive until the time for restoring all the things about which God spoke by the mouth of his holy prophets long ago. 

ṅnyè yob layean soan ai nyè, akui abog e mam mësë Zamba angakòbò a kòm ya kòm a anyu mimfufub bëprofet boe matoban.

22
Moses said, 'The Lord God will raise up for you a prophet like me from your brothers. You shall listen to him in whatever he tells you. 

Moses nyè angadzo na: Nti Zamba ayi mina tele profet hë anë ma a zaṅ babënyòṅ. Mivogolo e mam mësë ayi mina kad .

23
And it shall be that every soul who does not listen to that prophet shall be destroyed from the people.' 

Layi bò na, e mod osë ayi ki vogolo profet te, ayi mana ai si a ekoa bod .

24
And all the prophets who have spoken, from Samuel and those who came after him, also proclaimed these days. 

Anë fò na, bëprofèt bësë, atarigi abë Samuel akëlë osu, bësë bëngakòbò, ndò bëngabende e mëmos ma.

25
You are the sons of the prophets and of the covenant that God made with your fathers, saying to Abraham, 'And in your offspring shall all the families of the earth be blessed.' 

Mina minë bòn bëprofèt ai bòn bë elad-amvoe ya Zamba angalad ai bëtara, nyè ai Abraham na: Mënda më bod mësë ya si mayi luguban a mvòṅ dzoe .

26
God, having raised up his servant, sent him to you first, to bless you by turning every one of you from your wickedness."

Asu daan ngò Zamba angatele mbò-esye woe, alomo nyè, angafubu mina asu yë na mod osë ya abë mina alum bëbe bë mam boe mvus.