Acts 4

0
Peter and John Before the Council

Bakë sòman Petrus ban Yohannes a ekoan-nnam

1
And as they were speaking to the people, the priests and the captain of the temple and the Sadducees came upon them,

Mbol hm bëlèègè ai bod, ndò bëfada ai ndzoe bëzimbi ya tempel ai bësadukea bëngazu bò tëbë a mgbag,

2
greatly annoyed because they were teaching the people and proclaiming in Jesus the resurrection from the dead. 

bëwogo adzo di abe na bayëgëlë bod, bëyedëgan akui-lë sòṅ bëwu abë Yesus. 

3
And they arrested them and put them in custody until the next day, for it was already evening. 

Ndò babi bò, bëfudi bò a mimbog akui kindi lende ya hala, amu hala ngoge entoa ya.

4
But many of those who had heard the word believed, and the number of the men came to about five thousand.

Abui bod ya bëvogolo ebug bëngayëbë, ndò bod bëngakui dzam bò tò bakuda bëtan.

5
On the next day their rulers and elders and scribes gathered together in Jerusalem, 

Ndò hm lazu bò na, e kidi lende ya hala, ndò bëdzoe baban, ai bënyia-bodo-mvia, ai bësaṅa bëkalara baban bëngakoan a Yerusalem, 

6
with Annas the high priest and Caiaphas and John and Alexander, and all who were of the high-priestly family. 

fufulu ai Annas, fada nen, ai Kaifas, ai Yohannes, ai Alesander ai e ba bësë bëngabë a mvòṅ bëfada bënen, 

7
And when they had set them in the midst, they inquired, "By what power or by what name did you do this?" 

ndò batele bò a ezëzaṅ, bëngasili bò minsili, bò na: «Ai ngul fe, ngë ki na a dzoe za mihë bò e dzam di?»

8
Then Peter, filled with the Holy Spirit, said to them, "Rulers of the people and elders, 

Petrus atoa ndzalan ai Mfufub Nsisim ha, ndò abodo nkòbò, nyè ai bò na: «A bëdzoe bë nnam ai bënyia-bodo-mvia,

9
if we are being examined today concerning a good deed done to a crippled man, by what means this man has been healed,

ngë badzëṅ bia a si amos ya ana, etòm ya na bibò nkokòn mod mbëmbë dzam, ai na a dzoe za akodeban, 

10
let it be known to all of you and to all the people of Israel that by the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, whom you crucified, whom God raised from the dead—by him this man is standing before you well. 

mina bësë hm, ai ayòṅ Israel asë, yëman na a dzoe Yesus Kristus man Nazaret ya mina mingabomë a klos, ndò Zamba angavëlë nyè a bëkon, a dzoe die ngò e mod nyò atëlë mina mvoè osu.

11
This Jesus is the stone that was rejected by you, the builders, which has become the cornerstone. 

Ṅnyè anë akòg ya bia bëloṅ bë nda binga woa a fyè, ndò avëṅan ya nnomo akògò .

12
And there is salvation in no one else, for there is no other name under heaven given among men by which we must be saved."

Ndò fë akode asëki abë mod mfë, amu dzoe afë asëki a si a zaṅ bod, a biayean kodeban ete».

13
Now when they saw the boldness of Peter and John, and perceived that they were uneducated, common men, they were astonished. And they recognized that they had been with Jesus. 

Mbol bëngayen azombo Petrus ban Yohannes, bëyëmë fë na bayëm ki kalara, bò ha tègè ai ayègè, bëngakam, mbol bëyëmë na bod bëte bëngabë ai Yesus,

14
But seeing the man who was healed standing beside them, they had nothing to say in opposition. 

ndò babëbë e mod angabò mvoè nyò, atëlë ai bò, tègè ai ebug bafèd.

15
But when they had commanded them to leave the council, they conferred with one another, 

Ndò bakad bò na bëyanga a nsëṅ nda-mëdzo, asu yë na bëbui fëg bò a bò,

16
saying, "What shall we do with these men? For that a notable sign has been performed through them is evident to all the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and we cannot deny it. 

bò na: «Bibò ya ai e bod ba? Amu adzo ndëm te ayëmban ya a ngëëṅ a zaṅ e bod bësë bëtoa a Yerusalem, ndò biasë ki dò dzam sie. 

17
But in order that it may spread no further among the people, let us warn them to speak no more to anyone in this name."

Dzam da, asu yë na të dzam te layaman abui abui, ntëlan bò mvende të dugan kòbò ai mod ziṅ a edzoe di». 

18
So they called them and charged them not to speak or teach at all in the name of Jesus.

Ndò bëngaloe bò, bëtele bò mvende na tègè tègè bada fala ebug, ngë ki na ayëgëlë a dzoe Yesus.  

19
But Peter and John answered them, "Whether it is right in the sight of God to listen to you rather than to God, you must judge,

Ndò Petrus ban Yohannes bafèd, bò ai bò na: «Mina bëben yënan adzo di: Yë anë sosoo a mis më Zamba na bidaṅ mina vogolo alodo Zamba?  

20
for we cannot but speak of what we have seen and heard." 

Amu bia biasëki dzam bò të kòbò e mam bingayen, biwogo fë».

21
And when they had further threatened them, they let them go, finding no way to punish them, because of the people, for all were praising God for what had happened. 

Ndò badugan bò beme, bësoe bò, tègè yen e dzam bavë bò endëgëlë ete, hë etòm bod bë nnam, amu bësë bëngabë bëvaa Zamba duma asu e dzam angabò. 

22
For the man on whom this sign of healing was performed was more than forty years old.

E mod hm asimba mboan mvoè di angabòban a nyòl, angabë bisëb mëwom mënyii ai fus.

0
The Believers Pray for Boldness

Bëyègè bakogëlan na bëbi azombo

23
When they were released, they went to their friends and reported what the chief priests and the elders had said to them. 

Eyòṅ bëngasoe bò, ndò bëngakë a bod baban, ndò balèè bò e mam mësë bëfada bënen ai bënyia-bodo-mvia bëngakad. 

24
And when they heard it, they lifted their voices together to God and said, "Sovereign Lord, who made the heaven and the earth and the sea and everything in them, 

Amana bëngamana wog, ndò bò bësë bëngavë kiṅ fufulu abë Zamba, bò na: A Nti, wa ongakom yob ai si, ai maṅ, ai e byem bisë ya ete,

25
who through the mouth of our father David, your servant, said by the Holy Spirit, "'Why did the Gentiles rage, and the peoples plot in vain?

wa ongakòbò ai Mfufub Nsisim a anyu tara waan, mbò-esye woe David na: Asu dze mëyòṅ mënë ebyandi, minnam mibindigi zëzë mam?

26 
The kings of the earth set themselves,
and the rulers were gathered together,
against the Lord and against his Anointed'—

Minkukuma ya si-ndon mitëlë, bëdzoe bëkoan fufulu, na baluman ai Nti, ai Kristus woe .

27
for truly in this city there were gathered together against your holy servant Jesus, whom you anointed, both Herod and Pontius Pilate, along with the Gentiles and the peoples of Israel, 

Amu Herodes ai Ponsius Pilatus ai bëhaiden, ai bòn bë Israel bëngakoan a tisòn te mfaṅ na baluman ai mfufub mbò-esye woe Yesus ya ongawòbò mbòn,

28
to do whatever your hand and your plan had predestined to take place. 

na babò e mam mësë ya wò woe ai ṅyian woe bingatele na biayi bòban.

29
And now, Lord, look upon their threats and grant to your servants to continue to speak your word with all boldness, 

Ndò hm etoa dzi, a Nti, yënë mëlam maban, ovë hm bituga bie na bëkòbò ebug dzoe ai azombo asë,

30
while you stretch out your hand to heal, and signs and wonders are performed through the name of your holy servant Jesus." 

osam wò woe na obò bod mvoè, ai na mëndëm ai biyëṅ bi mam bibòban a dzoe mfufub mbò-esye woe Yesus.

31
And when they had prayed, the place in which they were gathered together was shaken, and they were all filled with the Holy Spirit and continued to speak the word of God with boldness.

Bëkogëlan ha, ndò e hom bëngabë nkoan ongatigëdan, bò bësë bëdzie ai Mfufub Nsisim, bëngakòbò ebug Zamba ai azombo.

0
They Had Everything in Common

Apostel babëlan ai byem biaban bisë fufulu

32
Now the full number of those who believed were of one heart and soul, and no one said that any of the things that belonged to him was his own, but they had everything in common. 

Nkunda e bod bënganyian a ṅyëbë ongabë hë nnëm mbòg mbòg, ai nsisim mbòg mbòg, tò mod të dzo na dzom dzie yawoge ai nyè, byem biaban bingabë bò hë fufulu.

33
And with great power the apostles were giving their testimony to the resurrection of the Lord Jesus, and great grace was upon them all.

Ndò apostel bëngabë bòòlò akui-lë sòṅ Nti Yesus ai abui fim, abui maa atoa ai bò bësë.  

34
There was not a needy person among them, for as many as were owners of lands or houses sold them and brought the proceeds of what was sold 

Mod ziṅan gabë ki a mëyaṅan a zaṅ dzaban; amu e ba bësë bëngabë bëbëlë mënda ai mal bëkuan ai mò, bëzaag ai mòni nkuan,

35
and laid it at the apostles' feet, and it was distributed to each as any had need. 

bëdzoge apostel a mëkol a si, bëngavë mod osë e taṅ a yaṅan ai dzò.

36
Thus Joseph, who was also called by the apostles Barnabas (which means son of encouragement), a Levite, a native of Cyprus, 

E Yosef ya baloe na Barnabas, mbòg ya ngab apostel, (dzoe die latyan na mòn evòli), angabë man Leviten, bëbyali ya Siprus, 

37
sold a field that belonged to him and brought the money and laid it at the apostles' feet.

angabë abëlë afub, ndò angakuan ai dò, asòò ai mòni, adzoge nyè apostel a mëkol a si.