Luke 1

0
Dedication to Theophilus

Lukas atil mbëmbë foe asu Teofil

1
Inasmuch as many have undertaken to compile a narrative of the things that have been accomplished among us, 

Mbol abui bod bëdzo ya na batòṅ ndòṅ e mam mëngayënan a zaṅ dzan, 

2
just as those who from the beginning were eyewitnesses and ministers of the word have delivered them to us, 

e kan e bod bëngayen ai mis ai e ba bëngavëṅan bësye bë Ebugu bëngalig ai bia dò,

3
it seemed good to me also, having followed all things closely for some time past, to write an orderly account for you, most excellent Theophilus,

ndò hm ma mëyen na anë mbëṅ na mëbie mam mëte mësë a zut atarigi a mëkèè mbëṅ mbëṅ ai evag esë, mëtil wa, a ndindiṅ Teofil, 

4
that you may have certainty concerning the things you have been taught.

asu yë na oyëm na e mam ongayègè mënë etere.

0
Birth of John the Baptist Foretold

E MAM MËNGALOD OSUSUA Babende abyali Yohannes Ndu-Bodo

5
In the days of Herod, king of Judea, there was a priest named Zechariah, of the division of Abijah. And he had a wife from the daughters of Aaron, and her name was Elizabeth. 

Angabò na, e mëlu Herodes angabë nkukuma ya Yudea, fada ziṅan yiṅi we, dzoe na Zakarias, fada ya nsamba Obia, ngal atoa a ngab bëngòn bë Aaron, dzoe na Elisabet. 

6
And they were both righteous before God, walking blamelessly in all the commandments and statutes of the Lord. 

Bò bësë bëbè bëngabë sosoo a mis më Zamba, bëbaala mëmvende mësë, tègè ai atòn a mam më mvende.

7
But they had no child, because Elizabeth was barren, and both were advanced in years.

Bëngabë tègè ai mòn, mbol Elisabet angabë nkokom, bò bësë bëbè bëntoa ya fë ban mimbu. 

8
Now while he was serving as priest before God when his division was on duty, 

Ndò fò labò na, eyòṅ angabë na abò esye fada dzie a mis më Zamba eyòṅ angakui na nsamba woe wasye,

9
according to the custom of the priesthood, he was chosen by lot to enter the temple of the Lord and burn incense. 

e kan tum bëfada yayi, ndò batòb nyè na atum otu a nda Zamba,

10
And the whole multitude of the people were praying outside at the hour of incense. 

nkunda bod osë okogëlan a nsëṅ a awola mëtunëṅa. 

11
And there appeared to him an angel of the Lord standing on the right side of the altar of incense. 

Ndò englès Nti ayene nyè, englès atëlë a wò mbo-nnomo alatar mëtunëṅa,

12
And Zechariah was troubled when he saw him, and fear fell upon him. 

Zakarias asigan ai ṅyënan angayen nyè, wòṅ oku nyè a nyòl. 

13
But the angel said to him, "Do not be afraid, Zechariah, for your prayer has been heard, and your wife Elizabeth will bear you a son, and you shall call his name John. 

Englès nyè ai nyè na: Të wambara, a Zakarias, amu ngogëlan dzoe ewogëban, ndò nyò ngal Elisabet ayi wa bye mòn, wayi nyè yole na Yohannes.

14
And you will have joy and gladness, and many will rejoice at his birth,

Ayi bò mintag mie ai mëfon moe, ndò fë abui dzam layi tag ai abyali die. 

15
for he will be great before the Lord. And he must not drink wine or strong drink, and he will be filled with the Holy Spirit, even from his mother's womb. 

Ayi bò mfaṅ a mis më Nti, ndò fë ayi ki nyu mëyòg tò bilam, ndò fë ayi dzie ai Mfufub Nsisim atarigi a abum nyia,

16
And he will turn many of the children of Israel to the Lord their God, 

ayi vëṅan abui bòn bë Israel abë Nti Zamba waban.

17
and he will go before him in the spirit and power of Elijah, to turn the hearts of the fathers to the children, and the disobedient to the wisdom of the just, to make ready for the Lord a people prepared."

Nti Zamba ayi nyè wulu osu ai nsisim ai ngul Elias, ayi vëṅan minnëm besya abë bòn, e ba bënë mëlò a mbindan sosoo, akomëzan Nti ayòṅ lënë a ngomëzan. 

18
And Zechariah said to the angel, "How shall I know this? For I am an old man, and my wife is advanced in years." 

Zakarias nyè ai englès na: Mayi yëm e mam ma ai dze? Amu ma ha, mënë nnom, ndò fë ngal wama antoa ya mimbu !

19
And the angel answered him, "I am Gabriel. I stand in the presence of God, and I was sent to speak to you and to bring you this good news. 

Englès nyè ai nyè na: Mënë Gabriel; ma makad tëbë Zamba osu, ndò mënë nloman na mëzu wa kad, mëbende fë wa e mam ma. 

20
And behold, you will be silent and unable to speak until the day that these things take place, because you did not believe my words, which will be fulfilled in their time."

Ndò hm wayi ku mvug, tègè dzam kòbò akui amos mam mëte mayi yenan, etòm ya na waandzëki ṅyëbë bibug biama ya biayi toban a abog daban. 

21
And the people were waiting for Zechariah, and they were wondering at his delay in the temple. 

Bod bëngayanga Zakarias ha, bëngakam na alaṅan abim kòm te a nda Zamba. 

22
And when he came out, he was unable to speak to them, and they realized that he had seen a vision in the temple. And he kept making signs to them and remained mute. 

Akui angakui, tègè dzam kòbò ai bò, ndò bazu yëm na angayen dzam a nda Zamba ete. Nyè ha hë abò ndëm ai mò, alaṅan mvug.

23
And when his time of service was ended, he went to his home.

Eyòṅ mëlu më esye moe mëngatoban, ndò angadugan a nda dzie.

24
After these days his wife Elizabeth conceived, and for five months she kept herself hidden, saying, 

A mvus mëlu mëte, ndò ngal woe Elisabet anòṅ abum, asòbò a nda ete ngòn etan nyè na:

25
"Thus the Lord has done for me in the days when he looked on me, to take away my reproach among people."

Nti abò e kan nyi e mëlu abëbë ma ndò avaè ma osòn a bod .

0
Birth of Jesus Foretold

Babende abyali Yesus

26
In the sixth month the angel Gabriel was sent from God to a city of Galilee named Nazareth, 

A ngòn samëna, ndò Zamba angalom englès Gabriel a tisòn ya Galilea dzoe na Nazaret

27
to a virgin betrothed to a man whose name was Joseph, of the house of David. And the virgin's name was Mary. 

abë ntud ngòn otoa mëtiṅ më alug ai fam dzoe na Yosef, mod ya nda bod David; dzoe e ngòn mininga nyi angabë na Maria.

28
And he came to her and said, "Greetings, O favored one, the Lord is with you!"

Ndò azu abë nyè, nyè na: Ovuma, wa ya ongadzie ya ai maa , Nti anë ai wa. 

29
But she was greatly troubled at the saying, and tried to discern what sort of greeting this might be. 

Angakam e bibug bi, angasili na e kan mësugan nyi endzò yatyan ya! 

30
And the angel said to her, "Do not be afraid, Mary, for you have found favor with God. 

Englès nyè ai nyè na: Të wambara a Maria, amu oyen maa abë Nti.

31
And behold, you will conceive in your womb and bear a son, and you shall call his name Jesus. 

Ndò wayi nòṅ abum, obye mòn, oyole nyè dzoe na Yesus. 

32
He will be great and will be called the Son of the Most High. And the Lord God will give to him the throne of his father David, 

Ayi bò mfaṅ, bayi nyè loe na mòn mëdaṅa-yobo, ndò Nti Zamba ayi nyè vë etoa nkukuma esya woe David, 

33
and he will reign over the house of Jacob forever, and of his kingdom there will be no end."

ayi dzoe a nda Yakob a kòm anë nkukuma, ndò fë edzoe dzie yayi bò tègè ai amana.

34
And Mary said to the angel, "How will this be, since I am a virgin?"

Maria nyè ai englès na: Nala wayi bò ya, ṅnyie anë ma tègè yëm fam?

35
And the angel answered her, "The Holy Spirit will come upon you, and the power of the Most High will overshadow you; therefore the child to be born will be called holy—the Son of God. 

Ndò englès adzo ai nyè na, Mfufub Nsisim ayi sus abë wa, ngul mëdaṅa-yobo ekubu wa a nyòl. Asu te, e dzi yayi byali mfufub yayi loeban na mòn Zamba. 

36
And behold, your relative Elizabeth in her old age has also conceived a son, and this is the sixth month with her who was called barren. 

Ndò ki yënë, manyòṅ Elisabet nyè fë anë abum a ayom die, e ngòn samëna nyi asu die, ṅnyè hm baloe na nkokom.

37
For nothing will be impossible with God."

Amu dzom ziṅ yasë ki dzam bò të bòban abë Zamba. 

38
And Mary said, "Behold, I am the servant of the Lord; let it be to me according to your word." And the angel departed from her.

Maria nyè na: Yënë etuga Nti, abò ai ma anë wadzo. Ndò englès akaan ai nyè.

0
Mary Visits Elizabeth

Maria akë yen Elisabet

39
In those days Mary arose and went with haste into the hill country, to a town in Judah,

Mëlu mëte, ndò Maria angakodo a si, akëlë a minkol avol avol, a tisòn Yuda, 

40
and she entered the house of Zechariah and greeted Elizabeth.

ndò anyian a nda Zakarias, asugu Elisabet.  

41
And when Elizabeth heard the greeting of Mary, the baby leaped in her womb. And Elizabeth was filled with the Holy Spirit, 

Ndò hm, ṅnyie anë Elisabet angawog mësugan më Maria, mòn angafoṅan nyè a abum, ndò Elisabet adzie ai Mfufub Nsisim, 

42
and she exclaimed with a loud cry, "Blessed are you among women, and blessed is the fruit of your womb! 

abede kiṅa yob nyè na: Olugu ai wa a zaṅ bininga, ndò fë olugu ai ebuma ya abum doe. 

43
And why is this granted to me that the mother of my Lord should come to me? 

Mambë ai dò he na nyia Nti wama azu abë ma? 

44
For behold, when the sound of your greeting came to my ears, the baby in my womb leaped for joy. 

Yënë na, etye etye ya mësugan moe mëkui ma a mëlò, mòn angafoṅan ma ai mintag a abum. 

45
And blessed is she who believed that there would be a fulfillment of what was spoken to her from the Lord."

Ndò fë, mvòm ai e nyò ayëbë na e mam Nti akad nyè mayi toban.

46
And Mary said,"My soul magnifies the Lord,

Maria nyè na :

47 
and my spirit rejoices in God my Savior,

Nnëm wama walugu Nti,ndò fë nsisim wama wafon abë Zamba nkode wama.

48 
for he has looked on the humble estate of his servant.For behold, from now on all generations will call me blessed;

Amu abëbë edzòdi-nyòl etuga dzie, atarigi etoa dzi ngongo bod esë yayi ma taman na mënë mvòm.

49 
for he who is mighty has done great things for me,and holy is his name.

Amu Ngungul abò ma mam mënen,dzoe die anë mfufub;

50 
And his mercy is for those who fear him from generation to generation.

ndò fë ngòl dzie enë a ngongo bod esë asu e ba bakam nyè.

51 
He has shown strength with his arm; he has scattered the proud in the thoughts of their hearts;

Angabò ngul ai enam dzie, amana tsam e ba bënë mëbun a minnëm miaban.

52 
he has brought down the mighty from their thrones and exalted those of humble estate;

Mingungul, avaè a bitoa mintomba; abede e ba bënë edzòdi-nyòl;

53 
he has filled the hungry with good things, and the rich he has sent away empty.

adzala e ba bënë zie ai e byem binë mbëṅ, asoe minkukuma mò mò.

54 
He has helped his servant Israel, in remembrance of his mercy,

Angavòli mbò-esye woe Israel, adugan tsog ngòl dzie,

55 
as he spoke to our fathers, to Abraham and to his offspring forever."

akyaè angakòbò ai bëtara, ai Abraham ai mvòṅ dzie a kòm ya kòm.

56
And Mary remained with her about three months and returned to her home.

Maria angatòbò ai nyè dzam bò ngòn elè, ndò angadugan a nda dzie.

0
The Birth of John the Baptist

Abyali Yohannes ndu-bodo

57
Now the time came for Elizabeth to give birth, and she bore a son. 

Eyòṅ abog abye angakui asu Elisabet, ndò angabye mòn fam.

58
And her neighbors and relatives heard that the Lord had shown great mercy to her, and they rejoiced with her.

Bod bë ngòdò ai bivuvuman bie bëwogo na Nti angabulu nyè wog ngòl, bëngatag ai nyè. 

59
And on the eighth day they came to circumcise the child. And they would have called him Zechariah after his father, 

Ndò a amos lala ha, bëngakë na bakele mòn ndò bayole nyè esya Zakarias.

60
but his mother answered, "No; he shall be called John." 

Nyia nyè na: Kokoa, anë dzoe na Yohannes .

61
And they said to her, "None of your relatives is called by this name."

Bò ai nyè na: Mod ziṅ ya bivuvuman bie asëki dzoe nala. 

62
And they made signs to his father, inquiring what he wanted him to be called. 

Ndò hm basili esya mbol ayi na bëloe nyè.

63
And he asked for a writing tablet and wrote, "His name is John." And they all wondered. 

Ndò adzaè akòg, atili na: Dzoe die anë na Yohannes. Bò bësë bëngakam.

64
And immediately his mouth was opened and his tongue loosed, and he spoke, blessing God.

Ndò anyu angayaaban nyè etye etye ai oyëm woe, angakòbò, ataman Zamba. 

65
And fear came on all their neighbors. And all these things were talked about through all the hill country of Judea, 

Wòṅ okuu e ba bësë bëngabë a ngòdò hala a nyòl, e mam ma mëngalèèban a minkol mi Yudea misë,

66
and all who heard them laid them up in their hearts, saying, "What then will this child be?" For the hand of the Lord was with him.

e ba bësë bëwogo mò bëngabaala mò a minnëm miaban, bò na: Dze yayi yenan ai e mòn nyò? Amu wò Nti ongabë ai nyè.

0
Zechariah's Prophecy

Nkòbò profet ya Zakarias angakòbò

67
And his father Zechariah was filled with the Holy Spirit and prophesied, saying,

Ndò esya woe Zakarias angadzie ai Mfufub Nsisim, ndò akòbò anë profèt, nyè na :

68 
"Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, for he has visited and redeemed his people

Olugu ai Nti, Zamba Israel, mbol asò yen, akode fë ayòṅ die.

69 
and has raised up a horn of salvation for us in the house of his servant David,

Angatele tòṅ akode asu dan, a nda mbò-esye woe David,

70 
as he spoke by the mouth of his holy prophets from of old,

anë mbol angakad a anyu mimfufub bëprofèt boe atarigi kòm ana,

71 
that we should be saved from our enemies and from the hand of all who hate us;

na akode bia a minziziṅ mian ai a mò e ba basiṅ bia;

72 
to show the mercy promised to our fathers and to remember his holy covenant,

na ayen bëtara ngòl, adugan tsog mfufub amvoe woe,

73 
the oath that he swore to our father Abraham, to grant us

e sòṅ an gakani Abraham esya waan, na ayi bia vë

74 
that we, being delivered from the hand of our enemies, might serve him without fear,

na tègè fë ai wòṅ, ṅnyie anë akode ya
bia a mò minziziṅ mian na bisye nyè,

75 
in holiness and righteousness before him all our days.

ai wòṅ a i sosoo, a mis moe, mëlu mësë ya enyiṅ dzan.

76 
And you, child, will be called the prophet of the Most High; for you will go before the Lord to prepare his ways,

Mfa woe, a mòngò, wayi loeban na profèt mëdaṅa-yobo, amu wayi kë Nti osu na wakom nyè mëzen,

77 
to give knowledge of salvation to his people in the forgiveness of their sins,

na ovë ayòṅ die ṅyëman akode, a evaè minsëm miaban,

78 
because of the tender mercy of our God, whereby the sunrise shall visit us from on high

asu ngòl Zamba waan, a Mëkui më kidi ayi bia sòṅ yen atyege a yob,

79 
to give light to those who sit in darkness and in the shadow of death, to guide our feet into the way of peace."

afyè e ba bëtoa a evovoe ai a awu, na atele mëkol man a zen mvoè.

80
And the child grew and became strong in spirit, and he was in the wilderness until the day of his public appearance to Israel.

Mòngò anganaṅ, angawon a nsisim, atoa a nkod-nnam akui amos ayean kèè esye a Israel a ngëṅ.