Matthew 1

0
The Genealogy of Jesus Christ

Nlaṅ abonde nda-bod Yesus

1
The book of the genealogy of Jesus Christ, the son of David, the son of Abraham.

Kalara mvòṅ bod Yesus Kristus, man David, man Abraham.

2 
Abraham was the father of Isaac, and Isaac the father of Jacob, and Jacob the father of Judah and his brothers,

Abraham abye Isaak, Isaak ny'abye Yakòb, Yakòb abye Yuda ai babënyaṅ,

3
and Judah the father of Perez and Zerah by Tamar, and Perez the father of Hezron, and Hezron the father of Ram, 

Yuda abye Farès ban Zara, ai Tamar, Farès abye Esrom, Esrom abye Aram,

4
and Ram the father of Amminadab, and Amminadab the father of Nahshon, and Nahshon the father of Salmon,

Aram abye Aminadab, Aminadab abye Naason, Naason abye Salmon,

5
and Salmon the father of Boaz by Rahab, and Boaz the father of Obed by Ruth, and Obed the father of Jesse, 

Salmon abye Boaz ai Rahab, Boaz abye Yobèd ai Ruth, Yobèd abye Yesse,

6
and Jesse the father of David the king.
And David was the father of Solomon by the wife of Uriah,

Yesse nyè abye nkukuma David. David abye Salomon ai mininga Uria, 

7
and Solomon the father of Rehoboam, and Rehoboam the father of Abijah, and Abijah the father of Asaph,

Salomon abye Roboam, Roboam abye Abia, Abia abye Asaf.

8
and Asaph the father of Jehoshaphat, and Jehoshaphat the father of Joram, and Joram the father of Uzziah,

Asaf abye Yosafat, Yosafat abye Yoram, Yoram abye Ozia, 

9
and Uzziah the father of Jotham, and Jotham the father of Ahaz, and Ahaz the father of Hezekiah,

Ozia abye Yoatam, Yoatam abye Akas, Akas abye Ezekias,

10
and Hezekiah the father of Manasseh, and Manasseh the father of Amos, and Amos the father of Josiah, 

Ezekias abye Manasse, Manasse abye Amos, Amos abye Yosia,

11
and Josiah the father of Jechoniah and his brothers, at the time of the deportation to Babylon.

Yosia abye Yekonia ai babënyaṅ abog mëkaban a Babilon.

12
And after the deportation to Babylon: Jechoniah was the father of Shealtiel, and Shealtiel the father of Zerubbabel,

A mvus mëkaban ya Babilon, Yekonia abye Salatiel, Salatiel abye Zorobabel, 

13
and Zerubbabel the father of Abiud, and Abiud the father of Eliakim, and Eliakim the father of Azor,

Zorobabel abye Abiud, Abiud abye Eliakim, Eliakim abye Azor,

14
and Azor the father of Zadok, and Zadok the father of Achim, and Achim the father of Eliud,

Azor abye Sadok, Sadok abye Ahim, Ahim abye Eliud,

15
and Eliud the father of Eleazar, and Eleazar the father of Matthan, and Matthan the father of Jacob,

Eliud abye Eleazar, Eliazar abye Mattan, Mattan abye Yakòb, 

16
and Jacob the father of Joseph the husband of Mary, of whom Jesus was born, who is called Christ.

Yakòb abye Yosef, nnom Maria; Eyë Yesus ya baloe na Kristus angabyali abë nyè.

17
So all the generations from Abraham to David were fourteen generations, and from David to the deportation to Babylon fourteen generations, and from the deportation to Babylon to the Christ fourteen generations.

Ngongo bod esë atarigi abë Abraham azaag kui abë David: Ngongo bod awom ai enyii, atarigi ki abë David aza a kui a mëkaban ya Babilon: ngongo bod awom ai enyii. Atarigi fë a mëkaban ya Babilon azaag kui abë Kristus, ngongo bod awom ai enyii.

0 
The Birth of Jesus Christ

Abyali Yesus Kristus

18
Now the birth of Jesus Christ took place in this way. When his mother Mary had been betrothed to Joseph, before they came together she was found to be with child from the Holy Spirit.

Eyë a hm fò abyali Yesus Kristus angabò na: Maria nyia woe angabë bëlë mëtiṅ më alug ai Yosef; Osusua yë na batòbò fufulu, lëntoa na anë abum abë Mfufub Nsisim.

19
And her husband Joseph, being a just man and unwilling to put her to shame, resolved to divorce her quietly.

Dzam da, mbol nnom woe Yosef angabë sosoo, tègè yi na asòman nyè, angadzëṅ na asoe nyè a mësoe.

20
But as he considered these things, behold, an angel of the Lord appeared to him in a dream, saying, "Joseph, son of David, do not fear to take Mary as your wife, for that which is conceived in her is from the Holy Spirit.

Hala angëlë atsogo nala a nnëm, ndò englès Nti angayene nyè a nlo, nyè na: A Yosef, man David, obë mbara nòṅ Maria nyò ngal; E dzi yabyali abë nyè dzili, yasò abë Mfufub Nsisim.

21
She will bear a son, and you shall call his name Jesus, for he will save his people from their sins."

Ayi bye mòn, oyolëge nyè dzoe na Yesus. Amu ṅnyè ayi kode ayòṅ die a minsëm miaban.

22
All this took place to fulfill what the Lord had spoken by the prophet:

E dzam asë dili angabòban, asu yë na e dzam Nti angakòbò a anyu profèt atoban na:

23
"Behold, the virgin shall conceive and bear a son, and they shall call his name Immanuel" (which means, God with us). 

Yënë sik, Ntud ngòn mininga wayi nòṅ abum, abye mòn, bëyole nyè dzoe na Emmanuel, nala watyan na Zamba anë ai bia.

24
When Joseph woke from sleep, he did as the angel of the Lord commanded him: he took his wife,

Avëbë Yosef angavëbë a oyò, ndò angabò mbol englès Nti angabende nyè, ndò anganòṅ ngal,

25
but knew her not until she had given birth to a son. And he called his name Jesus.

hë da tègè nyè yëm akui anë angabye mòn. Ndò angayole nyè na Yesus.