Acts 2

0
The Coming of the Holy Spirit

Asò-lë Mfufub Nsisim

1
When the day of Pentecost arrived, they were all together in one place.

Ndò hm, eyòṅ lëngabò na amos Pentekoste ongazu ya mana, bò bësë bëntoa hom mbòg.

2
And suddenly there came from heaven a sound like a mighty rushing wind, and it filled the entire house where they were sitting. 

Etye etye na, ndò eduṅ engasò a yob, hë anë mod nkulu, ndò engadzie nguma nda osë bëngabë bëtoa ete, 

3
And divided tongues as of fire appeared to them and rested on each one of them. 

bëngayen ayëm lakë lakaban anë ndoan, angatòbò anë mod osë ya abë bò a nlo a yob,

4
And they were all filled with the Holy Spirit and began to speak in other tongues as the Spirit gave them utterance.

ndò bò bësë bëngadzie ai Mfufub Nsisim, bëtari hm na bakòbò a minkòbò mifë, e kan nsisim ongabë obò na bëfala nkòbò.

5
Now there were dwelling in Jerusalem Jews, devout men from every nation under heaven.

Yuden bëngabë bëtoa a Yerusalem, bëtoa bod bë ṅyëbë, bësòò a mëyòṅ mësë ya si.

6
And at this sound the multitude came together, and they were bewildered, because each one was hearing them speak in his own language. 

E mod eduṅ nyò angayi bò, mod nkunda bod abugi fò ha, bëmana koan, bëngakam, amu anë mod awogo bò anë bakòbò nkòbò woe.

7
And they were amazed and astonished, saying, "Are not all these who are speaking Galileans?

Fëg engadzaṅ fò bò, bëngakam, bò na: «Nga e bod bësë bakòbò ba bënë bod ya Galilea?

8
And how is it that we hear, each of us in his own native language?

Ndò eyë anë ya na biawog bò, anë mod a nkòbò waan ya bingabyali ai wa?

9
Parthians and Medes and Elamites and residents of Mesopotamia, Judea and Cappadocia, Pontus and Asia,

Bia ha bod ya Partia ai Medina, bod ya Elam, ai e ba bëtoa a Mezopotamia, a Yudea ai a Kapadokia, a Pontus ai a Azia,

10
Phrygia and Pamphylia, Egypt and the parts of Libya belonging to Cyrene, and visitors from Rome,

Frizia ai Pamfilia, Egipten, bod ya basò a mfag Libia ya Sirena, ai e bëyëṅ basò a Roma, 

11
both Jews and proselytes, Cretans and Arabians—we hear them telling in our own tongues the mighty works of God." 

Yuden ai e ba bëngavëṅan a ṅyëbë Yuden, Kreta ai Arabia, biawog bò bëkòbògò minkòbò mian, bëlèègè biyëṅ bi mam bi Zamba». 

12
And all were amazed and perplexed, saying to one another, "What does this mean?"

Fëg edzaṅa fò bò, bënzëmë, bëngadzo, anë mod ai e nyò mbòg na: «Na ngò watyan ya ana?» 

13
But others mocking said, "They are filled with new wine."

Bëvòg bëngamgbali fò bò, bò na: «Bënë mbilan wayn».

0
Peter's Sermon at Pentecost

Petrus anòṅ nkòbò a amos Pentekoste

14
But Peter, standing with the eleven, lifted up his voice and addressed them: "Men of Judea and all who dwell in Jerusalem, let this be known to you, and give ear to my words.

15
For these people are not drunk, as you suppose, since it is only the third hour of the day.

Ndò Petrus angatëbë a si ai bë awom ai mbògò, ndò avë kiṅ, nyè ai bò na: «Mina e Yuden ai e bod bësë mitoa a Yerusalem, yëman e dzam di, mivogolo fë bibug biama.

16
But this is what was uttered through the prophet Joel:

Amu së ki anë mbol miatsog na e bod ba basòg mëyòg, (amu bingënë bibëlë hë awola lala ya amos), 16hë da, dzam te ndò profèt Yoel angakòbò na:

17
"'And in the last days it shall be, God declares,that I will pour out my Spirit on all flesh,and your sons and your daughters shall prophesy,and your young men shall see visions,and your old men shall dream dreams;

Layi bò na, a mëmos më mvua, Zamba ṅnyè akòbò nala, mayi soe Mfufub Nsisim wama abë mod osë, abog te bëndoman baan ai bëngòn baan bayi kèè na bakòbò anë bëprofet, binanga bian biayi yen mam a nlo, minnom mingayen biyëyëm a nlo;

18
even on my male servants and female servants
in those days I will pour out my Spirit, and they shall prophesy.

abog te ma mayi soe nsisim wama a nyòl bësye bama, fam ai bininga, mëmos mëte, bëngakòbò anë bëprofet.

19
And I will show wonders in the heavens above
and signs on the earth below, blood, and fire, and vapor of smoke;

Mayi bò biyëṅ bi mam a yob ete, ai mëndëm a si, mëki ai ndoan ai nkut otsida.

20
the sun shall be turned to darkness
and the moon to blood, before the day of the Lord comes, the great and magnificent day.

Nlo-dzobo ayi vëṅan dibi, ngòn evëṅan mëki, osusua yë na amos duma ai amos nen Nti wazu.

21
And it shall come to pass that everyone who calls upon the name of the Lord shall be saved.'

Ndò layi bò na, e mod osë ayi loe Nti ayi kodeban .

22
"Men of Israel, hear these words: Jesus of Nazareth, a man attested to you by God with mighty works and wonders and signs that God did through him in your midst, as you yourselves know—

A bod ya Israel, vogolan e bibug bi; E Yesus man Nazaret ya Zamba angatele mina a zaṅ ai mimboan mi ngul, ai biyëṅ bi mam, ai e mëndëm Zamba angabò a mò moe a zaṅ dzaan, akyaè ya mina bëben miayëm,

23
this Jesus, delivered up according to the definite plan and foreknowledge of God, you crucified and killed by the hands of lawless men.

Yesus te ṅnyè mingawoe, mibomë nyè a klos a mò më e bod bayëm ki mvende, abog ya angatilban, Zamba ayëmë fë nala, ndò angavë mina nyè,

24
God raised him up, loosing the pangs of death, because it was not possible for him to be held by it.

ṅnyè hm Zamba angakuli a sòṅ, atii angatii mësuṅ më awu, mbol awu angabë ki nyè dzam bi nkom.

25
For David says concerning him,"'I saw the Lord always before me,for he is at my right hand that I may not be shaken;

Amu David adzo asu die na: Mayen Nti atëlë ma osu abog asë, amu atëlë ma a mbo-nnomo na mëzaa nyaman.

26
therefore my heart was glad, and my tongue rejoiced;my flesh also will dwell in hope.

Asu te nnëm wama wafon, oyëm wama otaga, alodo anë nyòl dzama yanyiṅ ai afidi, 

27
For you will not abandon my soul to Hades,
or let your Holy One see corruption.

amu wayi ki ma voan nsisim a bëkon, tò ki na odzoge na mfufubu woe aboe a si.

28
You have made known to me the paths of life;
you will make me full of gladness with your presence.'

Ongalëdë ma mëzen më enyiṅ, wayi ma dzala ai mintag a mis moe .

29
"Brothers, I may say to you with confidence about the patriarch David that he both died and was buried, and his tomb is with us to this day.

A babëdzaṅ, dzogan ma mëtoan mina kad adzo tara David bëbëla na, Angawu, adzëban, ndò fë sòṅ dzie enë abë bia azaag kui amos hi.

30
Being therefore a prophet, and knowing that God had sworn with an oath to him that he would set one of his descendants on his throne,

Mbol angabë profèt, ndò angayëm na Zamba angakani nyè sòṅ na mod ya abum die ayi tòbò a etoa-edzoe dzie .

31
he foresaw and spoke about the resurrection of the Christ, that he was not abandoned to Hades, nor did his flesh see corruption.

Mbol angayen dò osusua, ndò akòbò adzo akui-lë sòṅ Kristus na: Ayi ki laṅan a tolendoṅ, ndò fë nyòl dzie yayi ki boe a si .

32
This Jesus God raised up, and of that we all are witnesses. 

esus te ṅnyè Zamba avëlë a bëkon, ṅnyè bia bësë binë bëbòòlò boe. 

33
Being therefore exalted at the right hand of God, and having received from the Father the promise of the Holy Spirit, he has poured out this that you yourselves are seeing and hearing.

Mbol mbo-nnomo Zamba angabede nyè, ndò anganòṅ ekaa Mfufub Nsisim abë esya, asoe nyè, akyaè ya miayen, miwogo fë di.

34
For David did not ascend into the heavens, but he himself says,"'The Lord said to my Lord,"Sit at my right hand,

Amu, tò anë David andzëki bed a yob, adzo na: Nti angadzo ai Nti wama na: Tòbògò ma a mbo-nnomo 

35
until I make your enemies your footstool."'

akëlë kui anë mabò minziziṅ mie etele mëkol dzoe .

36
Let all the house of Israel therefore know for certain that God has made him both Lord and Christ, this Jesus whom you crucified."

Ndò hm, nda-bod esë ya Israel eyëmë na e Yesus ya mina mingabomë a klos, ṅnyè Zamba atele Nti ai Kristus». 

37
Now when they heard this they were cut to the heart, and said to Peter and the rest of the apostles, "Brothers, what shall we do?"

Awogo bëngawog nala, nnëm ongakod bò a abum ha, bò ai Petrus ai apostel bëvòg na: «Bibò hm ya, a babëdzaṅ?»

38
And Peter said to them, "Repent and be baptized every one of you in the name of Jesus Christ for the forgiveness of your sins, and you will receive the gift of the Holy Spirit.

Petrus nyè ai bò na: «Tsendëgan, mod osë ya abë mina aduuban a dzoe Yesus Kristus asu evaè minsëm dzaan, abog te miayi bëlë efaè Mfufub Nsisim.

39
For the promise is for you and for your children and for all who are far off, everyone whom the Lord our God calls to himself."

Amu, mina, ai bòn ban, ai e bod bësë bënë oyab, ai e taṅ bod esë Nti Zamba waan angaloe, mina minë ai ngaga». 

40
And with many other words he bore witness and continued to exhort them, saying, "Save yourselves from this crooked generation."

Angabë hm fë alëbë bò, akòbògò ai bò nala ai abui bibug afë, nyè na: «Mikodeban ya a zaṅ e mvòṅ bod dzongo nyi».

41
So those who received his word were baptized, and there were added that day about three thousand souls.

E bod ba bëyëbë fò ebug dzie, bëduuban, ndò bod bëngabagëban bò a yob amos te dzam bò bakuda bëlè.