Acts 1

0
The Promise of the Holy Spirit

Mfufub Nsisim ayi sò

1
In the first book, O Theophilus, I have dealt with all that Jesus began to do and teach,

A Teofil, e kalara osu, mëngatil e mam mësë ya Yesus angabò, ayëgëlë, atarigi a mëtari,

2
until the day when he was taken up, after he had given commands through the Holy Spirit to the apostles whom he had chosen.

azaag kui amos angatëbëlë apostel ya angatòb, ai Mfufub Nsisim, ndò anganòṅëban a yob. 

3
He presented himself alive to them after his suffering by many proofs, appearing to them during forty days and speaking about the kingdom of God.

Mbò angalëdë emen, atala, a mvus yë na abi ya mintye akyaè asë, mëlu mëlu mëwom mënyii, akòbògò mam më edzoe Zamba.

4
And while staying with them he ordered them not to depart from Jerusalem, but to wait for the promise of the Father, which, he said, "you heard from me;

Ndò hm, adzaag ai bò bidi ha, ndò abende bò na të bakodo a Yerusalem, bëyanga hë mëtiṅ më esya, akyaè ya mingawog mëdzoo na, 

5
for John baptized with water, but you will be baptized with the Holy Spirit not many days from now."

Yohannes angadu a mëndim, mfa waan, miayi duuban abë Mfufub Nsisim e mëlu mazu ma.

0
The Ascension

Akë-lë yob Yesus

6
So when they had come together, they asked him, "Lord, will you at this time restore the kingdom to Israel?"

Ndò hm bëngamana koan, bësili nyè na: «A Nti, yë abog wazu dugan tele edzoe Israel di akui ya nga?»

7
He said to them, "It is not for you to know times or seasons that the Father has fixed by his own authority.

Nyè ai bò na: «Së ki mina miayean yëm mëbog ai bënyie ya tara angatele a ngul dzie,

8
But you will receive power when the Holy Spirit has come upon you, and you will be my witnesses in Jerusalem and in all Judea and Samaria, and to the end of the earth."

dzam da, miayi bi ngul eyòṅ Mfufub Nsisim ayi mina sòṅ a nyòl, abog te miayi ma bò bëbòòlò a Yerusalem ai a Yudea asë, ai Samaria, akëlë kui a mëbug më si».

9
And when he had said these things, as they were looking on, he was lifted up, and a cloud took him out of their sight.

Akòbògò nala, bëngayen nyè anë anòṅëban a yob, ndò nkut ongamana nyè bò dimëzan a mis.

10
And while they were gazing into heaven as he went, behold, two men stood by them in white robes, 

Ndò mbol bëngabë bëbëbëgë a yob anë akë, ondzi na, fam ebè entëlë bò a mgbag, ebëgë mimfum biyie,

11
and said, "Men of Galilee, why do you stand looking into heaven? This Jesus, who was taken up from you into heaven, will come in the same way as you saw him go into heaven."

bò na: «A Bod ya Galilea, dze mitëlë, mibëbëgë a yob? E Yesus ya avaaban mina a yob nyò, nala ngò ayi sò, e kan mihë yen akëlë a yob».

0
Matthias Chosen to Replace Judas

Apostel batòb efòlògò Yudas

12
Then they returned to Jerusalem from the mount called Olivet, which is near Jerusalem, a Sabbath day's journey away.

Ndò hm apostel bëngadugan a Yerusalem, bësòò a nkol bile-bi-mbòn; hom te ongabë babi ai Yerusalem, ntye dulu ya amos sabbat .

13
And when they had entered, they went up to the upper room, where they were staying, Peter and John and James and Andrew, Philip and Thomas, Bartholomew and Matthew, James the son of Alphaeus and Simon the Zealot and Judas the son of James.

Asuan bëngasuan a tisòn, ndò babed a nda-yob, e hom bëkarëga yanga; bënë ha na: Petrus ai Yohannes, ai Yakob, ai Andreas, Filip ai Tomas, Bartolomeus ai Matias, Yakob man Alfeus ai Simun man Zelot, ai Yudas man Yakob.

14
All these with one accord were devoting themselves to prayer, together with the women and Mary the mother of Jesus, and his brothers.

Bò bësë bëngabë nnëm mbòg mbòg, mban a ngogëlan ai bininga, ai Maria, nyia Yesus, ai babënyaṅ. 

15
In those days Peter stood up among the brothers (the company of persons was in all about 120) and said,

Mëlu mëte, ndò Petrus angatëbë a si a zaṅ babënyaṅ, (Nkunda bod ongabë nkoan hom mbòg ha dzam bò ntèd ai mëwom mëbè) nyè na:

16
"Brothers, the Scripture had to be fulfilled, which the Holy Spirit spoke beforehand by the mouth of David concerning Judas, who became a guide to those who arrested Jesus.

A babëdzaṅ, ntilan ongabë oyean toban, akyaè Mfufub Nsisim ongatari kòbò a anyu David, atyan ai Yudas ya angavëṅan nlëdë-zënë asu e bod bëzaa bi Yesus, 

17
For he was numbered among us and was allotted his share in this ministry." 

na angabë a ngab dzan, ndò abi fë ngab ya esye dzi. 

18
(Now this man acquired a field with the reward of his wickedness, and falling headlong he burst open in the middle and all his bowels gushed out.

Ndò mod te angakus aboda si ai mòni dzongo, ndò alaban ai asu a si, atole a zaṅ, miyè midabëra a si. 

19
And it became known to all the inhabitants of Jerusalem, so that the field was called in their own language Akeldama, that is, Field of Blood.)

Ndò e bod bësë bëtoa a Yerusalem bayëm nala, antoa hm na, bëngaloe afub te a nkòbò waban na: Akeldamak, nala watyan na: Afub mëki.

20
"For it is written in the Book of Psalms, "'May his camp become desolate,and let there be no one to dwell in it'; and "'Let another take his office.'

Amu anë ntilan a kalara bësalmen na: Dzal die lëbòò elig, ndò fë të mod atòbò ete, ai na Mod mfë anòṅò afola edzoe dzie .

21
So one of the men who have accompanied us during all the time that the Lord Jesus went in and out among us,

Bod bëziṅ bazuzu ya batòbò ai bia ha abog asë, eyòṅ Nti Yesus angabë awulugu ai bia, asë ali, anë ali,

22
beginning from the baptism of John until the day when he was taken up from us—one of these men must become with us a witness to his resurrection." 

atarigi a ṅduan Yohannes, azaag kui amos ya bënganòṅ nyè a yob a zaṅ dzaan; Layean na mbòg ya ete abò mbòòlò akui-lë sòṅ fufulu ai bia. 

23
And they put forward two, Joseph called Barsabbas, who was also called Justus, and Matthias.

Ndò bëbè bëngatëbë, Yosef ya bëloege na Barsabbas, atoa mëbëdan na Yustus, ai Matias.

24
And they prayed and said, "You, Lord, who know the hearts of all, show which one of these two you have chosen

Ndò bëngakogëlan, bò na: «A Nti, wa wayëm minnëm mi bod bësë; lëdëgë e nyò watòb a e bod bëbè ba, 

25
to take the place in this ministry and apostleship from which Judas turned aside to go to his own place."

na anòṅ etoa esye apostel ya Yudas angadzoge a si nyè akëlë e hom woe.»

26
And they cast lots for them, and the lot fell on Matthias, and he was numbered with the eleven apostles.

Ndò bëngaboe ngam, ebii Matias, ndò fò anyian a taṅ a postel awom ai mbòg.